NE-2040: ingress: Add httpsLogFormat and tcpLogFormat fields (#1832)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/haproxy-log-format.md

`HttpLogFormat` field, which has type `string`:

```go
// AccessLogging describes how client requests should be logged.
type AccessLogging struct {
        // destination is where access logs go.
        //
        // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
        // +required
        Destination LoggingDestination `json:"destination"`

        // httpLogFormat specifies the format of the log message for an HTTP
        // request.
        //
        // If this field is empty, log messages use the implementation's default
        // HTTP log format.  For HAProxy's default HTTP log format, see the
        // HAProxy documentation:
        // http://docs.haproxy.org/2.8/configuration.html#8.2.3
        //
        // +optional
        HttpLogFormat string `json:"httpLogFormat,omitempty"`

        // httpsLogFormat specifies the format of the log messages for
        // an HTTPS request
        //
        // If this field is empty, log messages use the implementation's default
        // HTTPS log format.  For HAProxy's default HTTPS log format, see the
        // HAProxy documentation:
        // http://docs.haproxy.org/2.8/configuration.html#8.2.4
        //
        // +optional

>         HttpsLogFormat string `json:"httpsLogFormat,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Three things:

We should document the actual default strings here as well, with the caveat that they could change in the future.  We should also add the excerpt that explains what each field of the format means - then there is a chance this will make it into our docs where it would be really useful for our customers.

Finally, the defaults for each of the three log formats should be different, perhaps highlighting a common formatting example for each scheme (http, https, tcp).

Author: I disagree. Documentation for each field already exists in the HAProxy documentation. Adding it here would be redundant and there is a link provided that explains HAProxy log formats.

Further, if no (custom) log-format is provided for any of the HTTP, HTTPS, or TCP log formats, the router will simply use the proper "option".

        // HAProxy documentation:
        // http://docs.haproxy.org/2.8/configuration.html#8.2.2
        //
        // +optional
        TcpLogFormat string `json:"tcpLogFormat,omitempty"`
}
```

The user may specify `spec.logging.access.httpLogFormat` to customize
the HTTP log format. The user may also specify
`spec.logging.access.httpsLogFormat` to customize the HTTPS log
format. The user may also specify `spec.logging.access.tcpLogFormat`
to customize TCP log format. For example, the following is the
definition for an IngressController that customizes each of the log
formats (HTTP, HTTPS, and TCP):

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: IngressController
metadata:
  name: default
  namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
spec:
  replicas: 2
  endpointPublishingStrategy:
    type: NodePortService
  logging:
    access:
      httpLogFormat: "%ci:%cp [%tr] %ft %b/%s %TR/%Tw/%Tc/%Tr/%Ta %ST %B %CC ..."
      httpsLogFormat: "%ci:%cp [%tr] %ft %b/%s %TR/%Tw/%Tc/%Tr/%Ta %ST %B %CC ..."
      tcpLogFormat: "%ci:%cp [%t] %ft %b/%s %Tw/%Tc/%Tt %B %ts ..."
```

Each of the log format fields contains a free-form format string, so

> none of these are validated.

Reviewer: Can we consider doing some form of validation, or at least adding unit tests that show malformatted log formats don't break the router?

Reviewer 2: +1, we should add to the API field comments (including the existing ones) that bad configurations can break the router deployment

      tcpLogFormat: '%ci:%cp [%t] %ft %b/%s %Tw/%Tc/%Tt %B %ts ...'
```

### API Extensions

This proposal adds two fields (`HttpsLogFormat` and `TcpLogFormat`) to
the existing `AccessLogging` structure.

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

N/A

#### Standalone Clusters

N/A

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

Since MicroShift does not run the cluster-ingress-operator, there is
no impact to MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

HAProxy can forward access logs to a syslog endpoint, and openshift-router
recognizes environment variables to enable this feature and specify
the log formats. Currently the only log format is HttpLogFormat
(`ROUTER_SYSLOG_FORMAT`). Additional environment variables for
HttpsLogFormat (`ROUTER_HTTPS_LOG_FORMAT`) and TcpLogFormat
(`ROUTER_TCP_LOG_FORMAT`) will be recognized by the openshift-router
to configure custom log formats for HTTPS and TCP logs, respectively.

Note that the current environment variable for HttpLogFormat
(`ROUTER_SYSLOG_FORMAT`) is non-specific and should be renamed to
(`ROUTER_HTTP_LOG_FORMAT`). The old environment variable

> (`ROUTER_SYSLOG_FORMAT`) should still be honored, but the new

Reviewer: There shouldn't be a need to honor the old env variable.  It's not user-facing.

Author: I'm happy to change this, but there was quite a bit of discussion about this early on and I walked away believing that honoring the old variable was preferable.

environment variable (`ROUTER_HTTP_LOG_FORMAT`) will take precedence.

### Risks and Mitigations

The meaning of the specified log formats depends on the underlying
implementation.  If we were to change away from HAProxy, the semantics of the
format would likely change.  We can mitigate this risk by documenting
it.

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Alternatives (Not Implemented)

It is possible to configure both `httpslog` and `tcplog` formats by
directly adding those options to the HAProxy configuration
template. While this would be an improvement, it would not allow for
custom log formats as can currently be done for `HttpLogFormat`. In
contrast, this proposal aims to provide a method to define custom log
formats for `HttpsLogFormat` and `TcpLogFormat` that are consistent
with the existing `HttpLogFormat`.

## Open Questions [optional]

N/A

## Test Plan

There are no planned e2e or integration tests for this
enhancement. This is largely due to the fact that log format is a

> free-form string.

Reviewer: We will need to add e2e tests to ensure that malformatted input is not allowed to create a fatal error for the router.

Author: This would be fairly complicated, as a log-format string has many possible components. Additionally, this is already possible with the existing httpLogFormat. Modifying any of these log-format string requires admin privileges.

Reviewer 2: but would it make sense to change the log format to add some field that is not standard, and check if the generated log matches the configuration?

## Graduation Criteria

N/A

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

### Tech Preview -> GA

N/A

### Removing a deprecated feature

N/A

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

An upgrade/downgrade of the IngressOperator will result is the router
image also being upgraded/downgraded. As such, openshift-router will

> recognize the new variables for log formats.

Reviewer 2: the variables are set by CIO, not? so on an upgrade/downgrade CIO is also rolled and the variables won't be there anymore.

## Version Skew Strategy

N/A

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions

## Support Procedures

If any format string contains an invalid variable, HAProxy will exit
immediately without providing a descriptive log message. For example, if a user includes a unrecognized format alias (eg. %GG), haproxy will emit the following error message:

```
[ALERT]    (168045) : config : Parsing [/etc/haproxy/haproxy.cfg:34]: failed to parse log-format : no such format alias 'GG'. If you wanted to emit the '%' character verbatim, you need to use '%%'.

> [ALERT]    (168045) : config : Fatal errors found in configuration.

Reviewer: In my opinion, this fatal error is not acceptable for a new feature.  See https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1832/files#r2338077374

---
title: haproxy-log-format
authors:
  - "@rohara"
reviewers:
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@knobunc"
  - "@alebedev87"
approvers:
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@knobunc"
  - "@alebedev87"
api-approvers:
  - "@knobunc"
creation-date: 2025-05-01
last-updated: 2026-05-29
status:
see-also: logging-api
replaces:
superseded-by:
tracking-link:
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-2039"
---

# HAProxy Log Formats

## Summary

This enhancement extends the IngressController API to allow the user
to configure different log formats for HAProxy. Currently, users may
only specify the `HttpLogFormat`, which is only used for HTTP traffic
with no SSL termination or passthrough. This enhancement would
introduce both `HTTPSLogFormat` and `TCPLogFormat` such that users
can define the log formats.

## Motivation

Users desire the ability to log extra SSL information when
applicable. This is useful when debugging SSL related issues. As such,
the user may want to define the log format similarly to how the API
allows for HTTP log format.

For completeness, a user may also want to define the log format for
TCP logging. This is useful when a route is configured for SSL passthrough.

### User Stories

> This enhancement will allow users to customize log formats for

Reviewer 2: not a big deal, but I usually prefer a user story that points personas and actions, like:

https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator.md#enabling-gateway-api and https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/ingress/aws-lb-eip-selection.md#user-stories

At least clarifying who is the user here? Is it the cluster-admin? the ingress controller owner?  It makes it easier to define where the configuration should live, what kind of configuration can be done, if we should have concerns about inputs that can break deployments, etc

Reviewer 2: More: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/guidelines/enhancement_template.md#user-stories (the template gives some good ideas)

HTTPSLogFormat and TCPLogFormat, similarly to how HttpLogFormat can
currently be customized. Additionally, using HTTPSLogFormat will allow
users to log useful SSL-related information that may assist in
troubleshooting.

### Goals

1. Provide an option to customize HTTPS log format.
2. Provide an option to customize TCP log format.

### Non-Goals

> Since all access logs are collected at a single endpoint, it is beyond
> the scope of this proposal to allow different log formats to be
> collected in separate logs.

Reviewer 2: So, something like:

```suggestion
1. Allow different log formats to be collected in separate logs
```

## Proposal

> The `AccessLogging` type allows specifying a destination using the `Destination`

Reviewer 2: some suggestion: It is easier for me and probably other reviewers to first understand which API are you speaking of (like an existing API or a new API? What is its resource/group?) and then discussing about if this is a new field, and existing field.

As an example:

"New fields will be added to the existing API  `ingresscontrollers.operator.openshift.io`, under the AccessLogging struct, allowing the ingress controller owner to define the log format for HTTPs and TCP the same way they do with HTTPLogFormat" (my wording here is bad, it is an example) 

This gives a bit more of context on what is being changed/created and where it will live before going to the examples below

        //
        // +optional
        TCPLogFormat string `json:"tcpLogFormat,omitempty"`
}
```

The user may specify `spec.logging.access.httpLogFormat` to customize
the HTTP log format. The user may also specify
`spec.logging.access.httpsLogFormat` to customize the HTTPS log
format. The user may also specify `spec.logging.access.tcpLogFormat`
to customize TCP log format. For example, the following is the
definition for an IngressController that customizes each of the log
formats (HTTP, HTTPS, and TCP):

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: IngressController
metadata:
  name: default
  namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
spec:
  replicas: 2
  endpointPublishingStrategy:
    type: NodePortService
  logging:
    access:
      httpLogFormat: "%ci:%cp [%tr] %ft %b/%s %TR/%Tw/%Tc/%Tr/%Ta %ST %B %CC ..."
      httpsLogFormat: "%ci:%cp [%tr] %ft %b/%s %TR/%Tw/%Tc/%Tr/%Ta %ST %B %CC ..."
      tcpLogFormat: "%ci:%cp [%t] %ft %b/%s %Tw/%Tc/%Tt %B %ts ..."
```

Each of the log format fields contains a free-form format string, so
none of these are validated.

### Workflow Description

**Cluster admin** is a human user responsible for deploying a cluster.

> **User** is a human user responsible for developing and deploying an application in a cluster.

Reviewer 2: hum, do we need the "user" definition here, given there is a single user story related to cluster admin?

Reviewer 2: also this points out the need to user story be more persona oriented (see my comment above)

N/A

#### Standalone Clusters

N/A

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

Since MicroShift does not run the cluster-ingress-operator, there is
no impact to MicroShift.

#### OpenShift Kubernetes Engine

This proposal does not include any functional differences for
OpenShift Kubernetes Engine.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

HAProxy can forward access logs to a syslog endpoint, and openshift-router
recognizes environment variables to enable this feature and specify
the log formats. Currently the only log format is HttpLogFormat
(`ROUTER_SYSLOG_FORMAT`). Additional environment variables for
HTTPSLogFormat (`ROUTER_HTTPS_LOG_FORMAT`) and TCPLogFormat
(`ROUTER_TCP_LOG_FORMAT`) will be recognized by the openshift-router
to configure custom log formats for HTTPS and TCP logs, respectively.

Note that the current environment variable for HttpLogFormat
(`ROUTER_SYSLOG_FORMAT`) is non-specific and should be renamed to
(`ROUTER_HTTP_LOG_FORMAT`). The old environment variable
(`ROUTER_SYSLOG_FORMAT`) should still be honored, but the new
environment variable (`ROUTER_HTTP_LOG_FORMAT`) will take precedence.

### Risks and Mitigations

> The meaning of the specified log formats depends on the underlying

Reviewer 2: There is the risk of misconfiguration, causing router unavailability. While there may not be a mitigation, I think this is worth a risk to be raised and mentioned that it is cluster admin responsibility to configure it properly.

When this happens, by the way, do we have any sort of metrics that can be used so the admin can go and rollback? IIRC on these misconfigurations the HAProxy will be on a reload loop, but not really down
